# Passkeys Cheat Sheet

*Everything you need to know about WebAuthn and passkeys*

---

## Overview

### Ceremonies

Authentication with passkeys is based on the two processes, also called ceremonies: **registration** (aka the "attestation phase") and **login** (aka the "assertion phase").

Each phase requires a random challenge generated by the server, which is signed by the authenticator and sent back to the WebAuthn server to verify the user.

---

### PublicKeyCredentialCreationOptions

`PublicKeyCredentialCreationOptions` is the central object of the attestation phase (Registration). It is created by and returned from the WebAuthn server, containing these attributes:

- **rp**: Identifies the Relying Party (= the server looking to authenticate the user), usually the ID is the server domain.
- **user**: Contains data about the user account requesting attestation. The ID is a byte sequence chosen by the Relying Party, that must not contain personal information. The username or e-mail address is saved instead in the `name` or `displayName` attribute.
- **challenge**: A randomly generated base64URL encoded BufferSource that needs to be signed by the authenticator.
- **pubKeyCredParams**: Indicates which algorithms are supported for the encryption of the keys. It's recommended to stick to the default values.
- **timeout**: Optional time in milliseconds for the client to wait for the call to complete.
- **excludeCredentials**: Optional list of credentials to limit the creation of multiple passkeys on one device.
- **authenticatorSelection**: Optional selection of the used authenticator for the method, e.g. whether a `residentKey` is required. See the next page of the cheat sheet for more information.
- **attestation**: Can be used to request that the attestation object is passed on to the Relying Party in a specific form. Possible values are `"none"` (default), `"indirect"`, `"direct"` and `"enterprise"`.
- **extensions**: Optional request(s) for additional processing, such as specific return values. e.g.:
  - `credProbs` requests information on whether the created credential is discoverable.
  - `prf` allows the Relying Party to use outputs from a pseudo-random function (PRF) associated with a credential.

---

### PublicKeyCredentialRequestOptions

`PublicKeyCredentialRequestOptions` is the central object of the assertion phase (Login). It is created by and returned from the server, containing these attributes:

- **challenge**, **timeout**, **extensions**: see above.
- **rpId**: The identifier of the Relying Party for the assertion request, usually its domain.
- **allowCredentials**: Optional list of credentials that are allowed for authentication, indicating the caller's preference by descending order. This list would be filled with `PublicKeyCredentialDescriptor`s.
- **userVerification**: Optional value to specify requirements for user verification during the operation. Possible values are `"preferred"` (default), `"required"` or `"discouraged"`.

---

### Attestation

During the Registration Ceremony, the Authenticator returns this Registration Response. (You can try this yourself in the [Passkeys Debugger](https://www.passkeys-debugger.io/).)

The `attestationObject` is a CBOR encoded object, containing information about the newly created credentials, the public key and other relevant data:

- **fmt** is typically evaluated to `"none"` for passkeys.
- **attStmt** is empty for passkeys and filled for other authenticators, e.g. hardware security keys.
- **authData** is a buffer of values containing the following data:
  - `rpIdHash`
  - `flags`
  - `signCount`
  - `aaguid`
  - `credentialId`
  - `credentialPublicKey`

`parsedCredentialPublicKey` contains the algorithm used for the newly created credential, encoded as a COSE-key with the important value `"algorithm"`. Only `"-7"` and `"-257"` are actually used in practice.

The `transports` property indicates mechanisms through which an authenticator can communicate with a client. Some common, sample value combinations are:

1. `"transports": ["internal", "hybrid"]`: Passkeys can be used from the platform authenticator (e.g. Face ID, Touch ID, Windows Hello) or via cross-device authentication (using QR code & Bluetooth).
2. `"transports": ["internal"]`: Passkeys can be used from the platform authenticator (e.g. Face ID, Touch ID, Windows Hello).
3. No `"transports"` property set: default behavior which gives no indications.

---

### Assertion

During the Login Ceremony, the Authenticator returns this Login Response. (You can try this yourself in the [Passkeys Debugger](https://www.passkeys-debugger.io/).)

The `signature` is used to verify that the user trying to log in actually has the private key. It is created by concatenating the `authenticatorData` and `clientDataHash` (i.e. the SHA-256 version of `ClientDataJSON`) and signing the result with the private key (in the authenticator). To verify with the public key, we concatenate `authenticatorData` and `clientDataHash` as well. If the verification result returns true, the authentication is successful.

The `userHandle` is the actual `user_id`. Read more about the `user_id` in the "Database Schema" section below.

---

## Deep Dive

### authenticatorSelection

The `authenticatorSelection` object allows the WebAuthn server to request settings from the authenticator and for the credential creation.

---

### Resident Keys vs. Non-Resident Keys

There are two types of passkeys that differ in their storage and retrieval mechanisms:

- **Resident Keys** (also called Discoverable Credentials): Resident keys are stored on the authenticator and retrieved during authentication. This way the client can "discover" a list of possible keys, which is why Conditional UI requires resident keys.
- **Non-Resident Keys** (also called Non-Discoverable Credentials): In case of non-resident keys, the credential ID is stored on the server and not on the authenticator. During each authentication, the authenticator derives the private key from a seed within the credential ID and an internal master key that is saved on the authenticator.

---

### Relying Party ID

The Relying Party ID (`rpID`) is a domain stored within the passkey, ensuring the passkey only works for the correct domain (browser URL). During authentication, the `rpID` is checked against the browser URL and only allowed in these two cases:

1. The browser URL matches precisely the `rpID`.
2. The browser URL is a subdomain that matches the `rpID` and the parent domain is not on the Public Suffix List.

---

### Conditional UI - Overview

Conditional UI ("passkey autofill") displays available passkeys in a selection dropdown for the user, when a user has a resident key registered with the relying party. It improves the usability of passkeys, but requires additional development efforts and is not available for all OS / browser combinations.

---

### Conditional UI - Implementation

Conditional UI only works with resident keys / discoverable credentials.

It's recommended to provide a different server endpoint to start the Conditional UI login.

**Technical Requirements**

The client needs to meet multiple requirements:

- The browser needs to support Conditional UI.
- JavaScript must be enabled and the web page must provide an HTML input field.
- Timeout parameters should be disregarded.

To avoid errors, the server should first test the client's availability with `PublicKeyCredential.isConditionalMediationAvailable()`.

**Autocomplete Token in Input Fields**

The input field should receive an HTML autofill token that signals the client to populate passkeys to the ongoing request. Besides passkeys, the autofill tokens can be paired with existing tokens, e.g. usernames and passwords:

```html
<input type="text" autocomplete="username webauthn" />
```

---

### Database Schema

There is no mandatory or standardized database schema for WebAuthn servers. However, this example database schema can be used to store the required information and provide all functionalities of a WebAuthn server. **Bold attributes are mandatory** for a minimal viable implementation, while the others are only needed for optional, but helpful features.

**Authentication-relevant data:**

- **Credential ID**: This is a unique ID that's generated by the authenticator during registration of a passkey. It should be used to look up the actual user account that's associated with the passkey. Additionally the `userHandle` (from `user_id`) should then be compared to validate the account used for authentication. Don't use the `user.name` attribute for comparison as it can change over time.
- **User ID (`user_id`)**: Unique ID specified by the Relying Party to represent a user account in their system. It's returned as the `userHandle` within the assertion-object.

**Metadata for display and selection of passkeys:**

- **User DisplayName (`user.displayName`)**: User-friendly, readable name that is typically the full name of the user. It's shown to the user, but not used during authentication.
- **User Name (`user.name`)**: Unique and readable name that is typically an e-mail address or a username. It can be shown to the user, but it's not used during authentication.

---

### Helpful Tools

These are helpful tools for working with passkeys:

- **Passkeys Debugger**: Tool for debugging the WebAuthn Response as JSON and testing WebAuthn operations with different options.
- **Passkey Glossary**: Explanation of passkey-related terms & concepts.
- **Device Log**: Log of your WebAuthn operations (only on Chrome: `chrome://device-log` & Edge: `edge://device-log`).
- **Chrome Passkeys**: See all passkeys in Chrome with `chrome://settings/passkeys`.
